Yesterday I submitted the first draft of an application for Parrot to particpate
in the Google Summer of Code for the summer of 2012. A submitted application is
a far cry from an accepted one so I don't want to get anybody's hopes up quite
yet. The application deadline is this Friday, and we should find out whether
we've been accepted the Friday after that.

Parrot has had several very successful years of participating in GSOC and two
successful winters in the Google Code In program as well. That's a significant
history of working successfully with students. Even if we don't get accepted
this year for whatever reason, that history is still something to be proud of.

As part of the application process we're supposed to provide two important
things: A list of ideas for potential projects and a template for student
proposals. Yesterday I created two pages on the github wiki for exactly those
purposes.

I've already filled in a basic [proposal template][proposal_template]. I would
like people, especially potential mentors, to review the proposal template to
make sure it includes all the information we would like to see.

proposal_template: https://github.com/parrot/parrot/wiki/Summer-of-Code-Proposal-Template

I've also created a page to hold [project ideas][project_ideas]. It's empty
right now, but I'll be dumping in about half a dozen ideas of my own soon and
hopefully will have more to come. Keep in mind that projects do not need to be
in libparrot and do not need to be developed in the Parrot core repository.
Ecosystem projects such as extension libraries and HLL compilers are fair game
for project ideas. I know I plan to submit some ideas involving Jaesop and
Parrot-Linear-Algebra. Project ideas can be for improvements to an existing
repo, or the creation of a new repo entirely. An idea may be of the form "Add
feature X to project Y" or it may be "Create new project Y".

project_ideas: https://github.com/parrot/parrot/wiki/Summer-of-Code-Task-Ideas

Whatever the project ideas are, they should conform to these guidelines: A
capable student, with some Parrot experience and regular discussions with a
mentor and other Parrot developers, should be able to accomplish it in the
span of three months. There's a lot of wiggle room in an estimate because
students have different strengths and weaknesses and different projecs
have different levels of inherent complexity.

The most successful project ideas are the ones that are not all-or-nothing.
If the student is running behind because of unforseen difficulties, she should
still be able to deliver something functional, just not with all the bells and
whistles hoped for. Likewise if the student is running ahead of schedule there
should be plenty of additional work to keep her busy until the deadline. You
don't need to specify all these details on the ideas page, it's just something
good to keep in mind.

For prospective students: If you have a project idea or two that you would like
to work on, please add it to the page. You don't need to worry about somebody
else "stealing" your ideas. Your project will only benefit from starting a
frank discussion about the ideas and goals now. More time to plan means you
will be able to get started more quickly and have to spend less time figuring
out what to do later.

Again, I would like to remind everybody about the post I wrote a while ago
about [successful proposals][proposals_post]. If you're planning to submit a
proposal, I suggest strongly that you read this post and take the lessons
therein to heart.

proposals_post: /2011/04/11/gsoc_proposals.html
