---
layout: post
categories: [Parrot, Release]
title: Parrot 4.4.0 Banana Fanna Fo Ferret
---

>Its existence guarantees nothing in itself, and the catalytic or
>Promethean moment only occurs when one individual is prepared to cease being
>the passive listener to such a voice and to become instead is spokesman, or
>representative.
>
>But it's important to remember the many dreary years when the prospect of
>victory appeared quite unattainable. On every day of those years, the "as if"
>pose had to be kept up, until its cumulative effect could be felt.
>
>-- Christopher Hitchens, <i>Letters to a Young Contrarian</i>

On behalf of the Parrot team, I'm proud to announce the 4.4.0 release of
Parrot "Banana Fanna Fo Ferret". [Parrot](http://parrot.org/)
is a virtual machine aimed at running all dynamic languages.

Parrot 4.4.0 is available on [Parrot's FTP site](ftp://ftp.parrot.org/pub/parrot/releases/stable/4.4.0/),
or by [following the download instructions](http://parrot.org/download). For
those who want to hack on Parrot or languages that run on top of Parrot,
we recommend [our organization page](https://github.com/parrot) on GitHub,
or you can go directly to the official Parrot Git repo on
[Github](https://github.com/parrot/parrot).

Parrot 4.4.0 News:

    - Core
        + Most internal calls to libc exit(x) have been replaced with
          Parrot_x_* API calls or PARROT_FORCE_EXIT
    - Documentation
        + 'pdd31_hll.pod' made stable in 'docs/pdds/'.
        + Updated main 'README' to 'README.pod'
        + Updated various dependencies, e.g., 'lib/Parrot/Distribution.pm'.
        + Updated all 'README' files to 'README.pod' files.
        + Added 'README.pod' files to top-level directories.
    - Tests
        + Update various tests to pull from new 'README.pod'
        + Updated 't/tools/install/02-install_files.t' to pull from new
          'README.pod'
    - Community
    - Platforms
    - Tools
        + pbc_merge has been fixed to deduplicate constant strings and
          merge annotations segments

Alvis Yardley (or a delegate) will release Parrot 4.5.0, the next scheduled
monthly release, on June 16th 2012. Subsequent release managers are to be
announced. A special thanks to our donors, contributors and volunteers for
making this release possible.

Enjoy!

I haven't been doing enough blogging lately! On Tuesday I put out the 4.4.0
release of Parrot, "Banana Fanna Fo Ferret". I figured it was a fun play on
words. I added a little quote from a favorite writer of mine, Christopher
Hitchens. Much of his writings can be pretty inflamatory, but I picked two
quotes that related to historical struggles for social progress, and which
when read in a certain light (and dramatically out of context) make sense for
Parrot too.

The release went off without a problem, and I've got a few branches waiting
in the environs to be merged. I'm sure I'll talk about some of those projects
if I can get back into a normal blogging rhythm again.
