---
layout: post
categories: [Personal]
title: New Job
---

One thing that's been eating up my time (and energy, and attention) lately has
been a hunt for a new job. I had intended to look around passively for a while
because I wasn't in any big hurry. However, once the recruiters got word that
I was looking, things started to move much more quickly. Suddenly I'm getting
dozens of phone calls every day, and dozens of emails. I was doing phone screens
and going on interviews. All of this and I was trying to not impact my current
job so much.

First thing's first: I'm not leaving [WebLinc](http://www.weblinc.com/) because
I'm unhappy with it. Also, I don't think they're unhappy with me. WebLinc is a
*great* place to work, and I'm thankful for the time I've spent there. If you're
in the Philadelphia area and you know ColdFusion, Ruby on Rails, and/or have
solid web fundamentals (JS/CSS/HTML) or graphic design experience (or sales, or
project management, etc)
[you should consider applying](http://www.weblinc.com/about/careers/). It's a
very hip young organization with great talent, a rapidly growing and diverse
clientele, and some real opportunity to do cool things. Also, there's a cool
bar/restaurant on premises, and the company has a good (and growing)
relationship with open-source and the developer community at large. If you're
young and talented and care about the craft of web development, definitely
consider WebLinc in your job search. You won't be disappointed.

So why am I leaving? WebLinc historically has had two main platforms: ColdFusion
and ASP.NET. Between the two, the ColdFusion team has had some of the biggest
project successes and the more demonstrated ability to scale up the size of
it's team. When you're a company that's growing as fast as WebLinc, the ability
to scale up your team quickly, to meet deadlines and to keep to budgets are all
very important. The ColdFusion team was doing these things better than .NET (for
a variety of reasons, not the least of which were endemic to the platform
itself). This lead to more sales for the ColdFusion team, and a larger, steadier
stream of work. At some point the decision was made to devote resources going
forward into ColdFusion (and a small, but growing, Ruby on Rails team) and not
devote new resources to .NET. This has nothing to do with the relative
theoretical merits of ASP.NET vs ColdFusion and, in my opinion, has nothing to
do with the quality of developers they had working on those platforms.
The reasons why one team was doing better than the other team aren't really
worth exploring at this point, but from a business perspective it was clear
where effort and resources needed to be devoted going forward.

I started looking around for a variety of reasons. I could have stayed for a
while in my current position, riding the waves of boom and bust that are
inherent in any job that bills hourly for maintenance. I could have started
transitioning over towards the Ruby on Rails team but chose not to go in that
direction, yet. Instead of sitting around and hoping things went well, I wanted
to take a little bit more control of my situation. I started looking passively
at first, but once the recruiters got involved things started moving quickly and
the rest is history. I've written a few notes up about my job hunt and my
dealings with various recruiters. These notes may turn into additional blog
posts (now that I have time and energy to try blogging more).

In early December I'll be starting at
[Halfpenny Technologies](http://www.halfpenny.com/), a small but growing company
involved with electronic medical records and related areas. The team is small,
the company is growing rapidly, and they have some very real and very
interesting technical challenges bubbling to the forefront. At the interview
they were throwing around words like "ownership" and "leadership", and were
talking about some very interesting new technologies. Combine that with a few
other factors, and the decision was actually an easy one for me to make.

I have a good idea about what kinds of work I'm going to be doing there but I
don't want to talk about it quite yet. In reality, you don't know anything until
you start working and get knee-deep in code. I also don't know what their
policies and attitudes are on blogging and public commentary, but I'll say what
I can when I'm confident enough to say it.

So starts a new chapter in my career, one that I'm hoping lasts quite a while
and takes me in some cool new directions. Again, I'll post more when I have more
to say.
