---
layout: post
categories: [JobHunt]
title: Your Resume
---

You're putting together your resume to highlight your software development
experience. How does it look? What do you put on there? What do you leave out?
How do you know you've done a good job? Today I'm going to share some of my
advice for writing up a resume for programmers.

As always, I'm no expert so take all this "advice" with a big grain of salt.
Having spent time on both sides of the hiring process, I've been able
to identify some things that work and some things that don't. I suspect that
none of this advice will be seen as controversial, as it mostly consists of
advice I've heard elsewhere and am simply bringing together in one place.

## Length

A resume is like a Google search. It's all about **matching keywords**, and
almost nobody looks past the first page. Recruiters look at your keywords and
search for jobs with similar keywords. Hiring managers look at keywords to see
if they fit in with the technology stack they're trying to staff.

A resume should be **One Page Long**. Yes, this means you. I know you and your
type, you think that you have more things to talk about, and every additional
detail you can cram in there will make you a more attractive candidate, and you
want to be the most attractive candidate possible. More is better, right?

No. Bad programmer. **Stop that**.

Your resume is all about keywords, and the longer the document is the harder it
can be to find relevant terms. Most interviewers won't look past the first
page. Some rushed hiring manager won't look at the bottom-half of your first
page. Length is important, and going longer doesn't make you look better. It
makes you look unfocused, disorganized, unrealistic, and like the rules don't
apply to you.

One small exception, and this probably doesn't apply to most readers, is that
certain types of senior-level people may opt for a longer format if they need
to mention many different projects. For example, if you've been on many small
short-term contracts it is probably necessary to list each one. If you have
worked across many projects using different technologies and ideas, you might
benefit from listing those out. Keep in mind that this may have the effect of
demonstrating versatility but not deep expertise. If your job history just has
lots of entries in it, you should consider omitting the ones that are shortest
or least relevant (and be prepared to explain why you don't seem to stay in one
place for very long).

## Formatting

Your resume should be formatted with bullet points and sentence fragments. It
should have lists of projects with the technologies and techniques those
projects employed. This is not the time or place for prose or lots of little
details.

Don't say "created websites with a variety of technologies". List those
technologies out so people can see exactly what you have experience with:
"Created websites with Python, MongoDB, JavaScript and jQuery".

For every job you have, formatting more or less wants to be the same:

    Title, Company                               StartDate-EndDate
        Brief description, if necessary
        * Bullet points listing individual projects/technologies
        * and individual responsibilities

Use a fancy resume template from the internet if you want, but these few bits
of information are what are important: Where, when, for how long, and what
you did there. This is all that matters. Hiring managers need to know when
you've worked with relevant technologies and for how long. This helps to
indicate how much knowledge you have and how fresh and current it is.

Important notice: If you are a front-end person like a designer, you might
want to take some care to make sure your resume looks nice. If the employer
expects you to make nice-looking websites or UIs, your resume should be a little
mini-example of your good design sensibility. Make sure that the design is
appropriate for the purpose (serious, focused, professional). If you aren't
involved in design, make sure the resume communicates the necessary information
in an effective way.

## Basic Rules

Here are some of the most important rules for developers of all levels:

1. It should fill exactly one page, no more and no less.
2. Do not list anything on your resume that you are not prepared to discuss, in
   detail, during the interview.
3. Do not include things that aren't relevant
4. Avoid qualifiers like "expert in" or "master of" if you can't talk about
   that concept at a high level.

## Resume Over Time

Now that we've covered the basic rules, let's look at what you probably need to
put on your resume at each stage in your career. As a dramatic
over-simplification, there are probably three important stages in your career:
junior level, mid-level and senior level.

* Junior developers have little to no relevant work experience.
* Mid-level developers probably have a year or more experience, are capable but
  don't have lots of individual responsibility, technical leadership or deep
  expertise. These developers, depending on company and trajectory, probably
  have beween 1-6 years experience.
* Senior folks have been doing this stuff for a long time, have expertise,
  and can be trusted to do big projects themselves with minimum oversight.
  Senior developers, depending on company and individual skill, probably have
  more than 6+ years experience.

These are rough guidelines. If you're not sure exactly where you fall, read all
relevant sections below and see what section most accurately describes what your
resume needs to hold.

### Entry Level

For an entry level resume, your education is probably paramount. List that and
make a big production of it: Relevant courses, GPA (if it's better than about
3.5/4.0), Honors, large projects, independent study and things like that.

List the relevant courses you took. These are probably the high-level major
courses only. You don't want to list gen-ed classes **unless** it's something
particularly relevant to the position like a foreign language (if the company
industry has particular need of that language) or arts (if the job may involve
design work).

Internships and open-source projects (You do have some of that on there, right?)
are good but probably not as important as your schooling. Your first job is
going to involve a lot of learning and training. The employer wants to see that
you have the necessary baseline knowledge, so that you stand a good chance of
surviving the necessary on-the-job learning that will be expected of you.

If you do have significant open-source experience, feel free to list that
prominently as well, but don't make a mountain out of a mole hill. A few commits
to a project, especially a well-known one, are interesting but not
extremely impressive. Now, if you have made significant contributions, that's
a different story entirely.

From top to bottom, your resume should have:

* Some sort of objective statement, one or two sentences long, talking about how
  you are looking to start your career and what you bring to the table in lieu
  of actual work experience.
* Your education: Degrees earned (if any), relevant courses, large projects
  (especially group projects where you played a significant role), GPA, etc
* Relevant experience: internships and open-source projects.

If you still have space to fill, list technologies and programming languages
with which you have any experience or familiarity. Nothing fancy. Have a
heading for "Relevant Skills" and just list them with bullet points. The purpose
of this section is just to fill whitespace at the bottom of the page, nothing
more.

### Mid-Level

Work experience is your most important asset now, so that becomes the star of
the show. From top to bottom, your resume should include:

1. Objective statement showing where you want your career to go from here.
2. Work experience, highlighting both technology *and* process. Process includes
   things like Agile, SCRUM, TDD, etc. Make sure to highlight things for which
   you had ownership, leadership or responsibility.
3. Internship or Open Source contributions (if relevant), any professional
   certifications, or anything else of professional relevance.
4. School, focusing only on dates and degrees. Leave out GPA. Don't list
   individual courses, but do list areas of concentration or particularly big
   projects, if any are relevant.

Again, if you still have space, list bullet points with individual technology
competency. Only list the most important things, and only to fill space.

### Senior Level

Work experience is really your only relevant asset here, unless you have a
substantial body of open source or extra curricular activities (writing books,
publishing papers, technical training or certification, public speaking, etc).
Your resume should contain from top to bottom:

1. A professional summary. One or two sentences telling what you do, how you
   specialize, and where you are headed.
2. Work experience, highlighting big projects, key responsibilities, and any
   expertise. Most recent, most important things go closer to the top.
3. Professional certifications, open-source projects, publications, etc
4. Education summary. Just degrees and dates. Nothing else is relevant anymore.
   Some companies won't care about education at all at this point, some other
   companies will require a degree but only care that you graduated or not, no
   other details matter.

If you still have space, go back and expand on your biggest work projects. At
this point you shouldn't be listing things that aren't directly related to the
jobs you've worked.

## Overview

The resume serves one purpose: To get you in the door for an interview. Your
resume should be a very short, focused overview of who you are as a technology
professional. It should contain lots of keywords and make them easy to find.
Once you've been in for an interview, your live performance there will matter
much more than anything written on paper. If you follow some basic guidelines
and highlight the important things, your resume should be enough to get you in
the door, and that's all that you need.
