---
layout: post
categories: [Parrot]
title: Parrot in 2011
---

It's 2011, and the big 3.0 release of Parrot is due out in only a few days.
This does, or it should, represent something of a new era for Parrot
development.

What are we going to see in 2011 with respect to Parrot? There are a handful
of things each that I would like to see, and that I think we actually will
see.

First, the things that I think we actually will see:

1. Parrot is going to get *smaller*. By that I mean we are going to be pulling
   non-essential bits out of libparrot and moving them into alternate
   front-ends and into other ecosystem projects. Things like Parrot's
   OpenGL bindings, The Parrot::Embed bindings for Perl5, and other items like
   the Complex (and hopefully the BigInt/BigNum) PMCs will be moving out of
   core and into their own new repositories. Far from being a death knell, I
   fully expect this move to bring new life to these bits of code. I also
   think we are going to see some of Parrot's user-facing interfaces become
   much more lean, but functional and robust.
2. Along a similar vein, in terms of community and leadership I expect Parrot
   to be making fewer promises, but to be more faithful in delivering the
   things we do promise. If we say it, we mean it. If we don't believe it we
   won't say it. Simple.
3. We are going to see radical changes, in most cases radical improvements, to
   Parrot's serialization system and it's packfile types. Packfiles are going
   to get a shiney new API, and we are going to make them much more usable.
   By the end of the year I fully expect HLL compilers to be generating
   packfiles directly instead of generating intermediate PIR and then
   compiling that down to packfiles.
4. A lot of code is going to be refactored and even rewritten to be more
   readable, more maintainable, and more hackable. This is going to happen
   across the board, and will be driven by several key developers.
5. We are going to see a renewed interest in testing, verification, and
   continuous integration.

These are things that I know are going to be happening in 2011 because they
are happening now and I know some trends are going to continue because the
people in charge of them are going to make them happen.

What we have above are things that are going to happen, but those few things
aren't really enough to fill an entire year's worth of development from our
team. There are a number of things that I am hopeful will happen, and I am
confident that we have the manpower and motivation to deliver if we try:

1. *A new GC*. In the category of eternal vaporware we have two favorite
   candidates: Duke Nukem Forever and Parrot's GC. I think 2011 can be the
   year for both of them. We want it enough, from there it's just a simple
   matter of writing some code.
2. *IMCC will be out*. With the packfile improvements I mentioned above, I
   think its just a matter of time before we finally rip IMCC out of libparrot
   and treat it as being an optional add-on for bootstrapping purposes only. I
   think NQP and PCT will continue to be written in PIR. I think we will see a
   lot more development of libraries and things in NQP and Winxed because of
   this shift.
3. *Lorito*. I don't think we are going to see the whole-hog conversion of
   Parrot to Lorito, but we are going to see some definite movement in that
   direction. I think it's entirely reasonable, if packfiles improve and IMCC
   is extracted from libparrot, that we will see PIR ops rewritten as Lorito
   ops and at least a rudimentary JIT provided for it. I don't think we will
   see things like core PMC types rewritten in Lorito, nor many (if any) parts
   of Parrot's internals.
4. *A new Object Model*. Even if we want to steal the new object model from
   Rakudo, there's still some work to do to evaluate it and make sure it suits
   our needs, and also some design work necessary to figure out how it fits
   in with the rest of our system. This is not to mention the implementation
   work that still needs to be done on it, and then the work required to get
   it merged into our system. But, I think it's very possible we get the new
   MOP merged into Parrot, and I think everybody will win a little bit because
   of it.

There's a list of general things that I think Parrot will do and will probably
do in 2011. Here now is a short lightning list of things that I want to do
personally, in Parrot and in my related ecosystem projects:

1. I want to add new "generator" types to Parrot-Linear-Algebra (PLA). These
   new types will be a matrix of subroutines that we can extract values from
   for particular inputs. Think about the difference in linear algebra between
   matrix `A` and matrix `A(t)`.
2. I want to add LAPACK bindings for PLA, so we can do non-trivial operations
   like finding matrix inverses, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, performing
   transformations, etc. This is where the real power of this project will
   become apparent.
3. I want to get working on a new [JavaScript implementation][js] for Parrot.
4. I want to expand ParrotSharp and make it a much fuller-featured interface
   to Parrot. I want people to be able to use Parrot from C# in a very natural
   way. Then, when the binding are mature enough, I want to expand this to
   cover HLLs as well so you can embed any HLL that runs on Parrot into C#
   seamlessly.
5. I want to rewrite Parrot::Embed to use the new embedding API. Along the way
   I think Parrot::Embed will grow significantly in capability, because the
   new API is much more capable than the old one.
6. I want to cleanup and refactor several subsystems in Parrot including the
   PCC system and Exceptions.
7. I want to start working on a comprehensive testing library. This will
   probably be based largely on the working bits of the Kakapo test framework,
   though it will probably become larger than that.
8. I would like to start a comprehensive rewrite of Matrixy. All the necessary
   infrastructural parts are in place now to support the function call
   semantics of the language. I would like, as much as possible, to write it
   in something better than PIR, and eventually migrate it so it is completely
   written in Matrixy itself except for the parser (which will probably still
   be written in NQP). With PLA providing the lion's share of data type
   semantics and primitive operations, I think we can write most builtin
   library functions directly in Matrixy.

[js]: /2010/12/07/javascript_on_parrot_plan.html

In terms of my product management role, I'm focusing my efforts now on testing
the hell out of Parrot in anticipation of the 3.0 release. Thereafter, I want
to test, expand, and use the embedding API a lot, and review the old embedding
API and the extending API.

In terms of the Parrot Foundation Board of Directors, I think we have a lot of
work to do this year, which I will talk about later.

2011 is going to be a very busy and eventful year, and I'm excited to see what
all we can accomplish.
